I want to talk about social innovation
and social entrepreneurship I happen to
have triplets they're little they were
five years old sometimes I tell people
have triplets they say really how many
here's a picture of the kids that sage
and annalisa and Ryder
now I also happen to be gay being gay
and fathering triplets is by far the
most socially innovative socially
entrepreneurial thing I have ever the
real social innovation I want to talk
about involves charity I want to talk
about how the things we've been taught
to think about giving and about charity
and about the nonprofit sector are
actually undermining the causes we love
and our profound yearning to change the
world but before I do that I want to ask
if we even believe that the nonprofit
sector has any serious role to play in
changing the world a lot of people say
now that business will lift up the
developing economies and social business
will take care of the rest
and I do believe that business will move
the great mass of humanity forward but
it always leaves behind that 10% or more
that is most disadvantaged or unlucky
and social business needs markets and
there are some issues for which you just
can't develop the kind of money measures
that you need for a market I sit on the
board of a Center for the
developmentally disabled and these
people want laughter and compassion and
they want love how do you monetize that
and that's where the nonprofit sector
and philanthropy come in philanthropy is
the market for love it is the market for
all those people for whom there is no
other market coming and so if we really
want like Buckminster Fuller said a
world that works for everyone with no
one and nothing left out
then the nonprofit sector has to be a
serious part of the conversation but it
doesn't seem to be working why have our
breast cancer charities not come close
to finding a cure for breast cancer or
our homeless charities not come close to
ending homelessness in any major city
why his poverty remains stuck at 12
percent of the u.s. population for 40
years and the answer is these social
problems are massive in scale our
organizations are tiny up against them
and we have a belief system that keeps
them tiny we have to rule books we have
one for the nonprofit sector and one for
the rest of the economic world
it's an apartheid and it discriminates
against the for-profit sector in five
different areas the first being
compensation so in the for-profit sector
the more value you produce the more
money you can make but we don't like
nonprofits to use money to incentivize
people to produce more in social service
we have a visceral reaction to the idea
that anyone would make very much money
helping other people interesting that we
don't have a visceral reaction to the
notion that people would make a lot of
money not helping other people you know
you want to make fifty million dollars
selling violent video games the kids go
for it we'll put you on the cover of
Wired magazine but you want to make half
a million dollars trying to cure kids of
malaria and you're considered a parasite
yourself
and we think of this is our system of
ethics but what we don't realize is that
this system has a powerful side effect
which is it gives a really stark
mutually exclusive choice between doing
very well for yourself and your family
or doing good for the world
to the brightest minds coming out of our
best universities and sends tens of
thousands of people who could make a
huge difference in the nonprofit sector
marching every year directly into the
for-profit sector because they're not
willing to make that kind of lifelong
economic sacrifice Businessweek did a
survey looked at the compensation
packages for MBAs 10 years out of
Business School and the median
compensation for a Stanford MBA with
bonus at the age of 38 was $400,000
meanwhile for the same year the average
salary for the CEO of a 5 million dollar
plus medical charity in the US was 232
thousand dollars and for a hunger
charity eighty four thousand dollars now
there's no way you're gonna get a lot of
people with $400,000 talent to make a
three hundred and sixteen thousand
dollar sacrifice every year to become
the CEO of a hunger charity some people
say well that's just because those MBA
types are greedy not necessarily they
might be smart it's cheaper for that
person to donate a hundred thousand
dollars every year to the hungry charity
save fifty thousand dollars on their
taxes so still be roughly two hundred
seventy thousand dollars a year ahead of
the game now be called a philanthropist
because they donated $100,000 to charity
probably sit on the board of the hunger
charity indeed probably supervise the
poor sob who decided to become the CEO
of the hunger charity and have a
lifetime of this kind of power and
influence and popular praise still ahead
of them
the second area of discrimination is
advertising and marketing so we tell the
for-profit sector spend spend spend on
advertising until the last dollar no
longer produces a penny of value but we
don't like to see our donation spent on
advertising and charity our attitude is
well look if you can get the advertising
donated you know at four o'clock in the
morning I'm okay with that but I don't
want my donation spent on advertising I
want
to go to the needy as if the money
invested in advertising could not bring
in dramatically greater sums of money to
serve the needy in the 1990s my company
created the long-distance aids ride
bicycle journeys and 60 mile long Breast
Cancer three-day walks and over the
course of nine years we had a hundred
and eighty two thousand ordinary heroes
participate and they raised the total of
581 million dollars they raised they
raised more money more quickly for these
causes than any events in history all
based on the idea that people are weary
of being asked to do the least they can
possibly do people are yearning to
measure the full distance of their
potential on behalf of the causes that
they care about deeply but they have to
be asked we got that many people to
participate by buying full-page ads in
the New York Times and the Boston Globe
and primetime radio and TV advertising
do you know how many people we would
have gotten if we put up flyers in the
laundromat charitable giving has
remained stuck in the US the 2% of GDP
ever since we started measuring it in
the 1970s that's an important fact
because it tells us that in 40 years the
nonprofit sector has not been able to
wrestle any market share away from the
for-profit sector and if you think about
it how could one sector possibly take
market share away from another sector if
it isn't really allowed to market and if
we tell the consumer brands you may
advertise all the benefits of your
product but we tell charities you cannot
advertise all the good that you do where
do we think the consumer dollars are
going to flow the third area of
discrimination is the taking of risk in
pursuit of new ideas for generating
revenue so Disney can make a new 200
million dollar movie that flops and
nobody calls the Attorney General but
you do a little one million dollar
community fundraiser for the poor and it
doesn't produce a 75 percent profit to
the cause in the first 12 months and
your characters called into question
so nonprofits are really reluctant to
attempt any brave dare
giant scale new fundraising endeavors
for fear that if the thing fails their
reputations will be dragged through the
mud well you and I know when you
prohibit failure you kill innovation if
you kill innovation and fundraising you
can't raise more revenue if you can't
raise more revenue you can't grow and if
you can't grow you can't possibly solve
large social problems the fourth area is
time so Amazon went for six years
without returning any profit to
investors and people had patience they
knew that there was a long term
objective down the line of building
market dominance but if a nonprofit
organization ever had a dream of
building magnificent scale that required
that for six years no money was going to
go to the needy it was all gonna be
invested in building a scale we would
expect the crucifixion and the last
areas profit itself so the for-profit
sector can pay people profits in order
to attract their capital for their new
ideas but you can't pay profits in a non
profit sector so the for-profit sector
has a lock on the multi trillion-dollar
capital markets and the nonprofit
sectors star for growth and risk and
idea capital well you put those five
things together you can't use money to
lure talent away from the for-profit
sector you can't advertise on anywhere
near the scale the for-profit sector
does for new customers you can't take
the kinds of risks in pursuit of those
customers that the for-profit sector
takes you don't have the same amount of
time to find them as the for-profit
sector and you don't have a stock market
with which to fund any of this even if
you could do it in the first place and
you've just put the nonprofit sector at
an extreme disadvantage to the
for-profit sector on every level if we
have any doubts about the effects of
this separate rulebook this statistic is
sobering from 1970 to 2009 the number of
nonprofits that really grew that crossed
the 50 million dollar annual revenue
barrier is 144 in the same time the
number of for profits that crossed it is
46 thousand one hundred and thirty six
so we're dealing with social problems
that are massive in scale and our
organizations can't generate any scale
all of the scale goes to coca-cola and
Burger King so why do we think this way
well
like most fanatical Dogma in America
these ideas come from old Puritan
beliefs the Puritans came here for
religious reasons or so they said but
they also came here because they wanted
to make a lot of money they were pious
people but they were also really
aggressive capitalists and they were
accused of extreme forms of
profit-making tendencies compared to the
other colonists but at the same time the
Puritans were Calvinists so they were
taught literally to hate themselves they
were taught that self-interest was a
raging sea that was a sure path to
eternal damnation
well this created a real problem for
these people right here they've come all
the way across the Atlantic to make all
this money making all this money we'll
get you sent directly to hell what were
they to do about this well charity
became their answer it became this
economic sanctuary where they could do
penance for their profit-making
tendencies at 5 cents on the dollar so
of course how could you make money in
charity if charity was your penance for
making money financial incentive was
exiled from the realm of helping others
so that it could thrive in the area of
making money for yourself and in 400
years nothing has intervened to say
that's counterproductive and that's
unfair
now this ideology gets policed by this
one very dangerous question which is
what percentage of my donation goes to
the cause versus overhead there are a
lot of problems with this question I'm
going to just focus on two first it
makes us think that overhead is a
negative that it is somehow not part of
the cause but it absolutely is
especially if it's being used for growth
now this idea that overhead is somehow
an enemy of the cause creates the second
much larger problem which is it forces
organizations to go without the overhead
things they really need to grow in the
interest of keeping overhead low so
we've all been taught that charity
should spend as little as possible on
overhead things like fundraising under
the theory that well the less money you
spend on fundraising the more money
there is available for the cause well
that's true if it's a depressing world
and we
this pie cannot be made any bigger but
if it's a logical world in which
investment in fundraising actually
raises more funds and makes the pie
bigger than we have it precisely
backwards and we should be investing
more money not less in fundraising
because fundraising is the one thing
that has the potential to multiply the
amount of money available for the cause
that we care about so deeply I'll give
you two examples we launched the AIDS
rides with an initial investment of
$50,000 in risk capital within nine
years we had multiplied that 1980 two
times into a hundred and eight million
dollars after all expenses for AIDS
services we launched the breast cancer
three days with an initial investment of
three hundred and fifty thousand dollars
in risk capital within just five years
we had multiplied that five hundred and
fifty four times into one hundred and
ninety four million dollars after all
expenses for breast cancer research
now if you were a philanthropist really
interested in breast cancer what would
make more sense go out and find the most
innovative researcher in the world and
give her three hundred and fifty
thousand dollars for research or give
her fundraising Department the three
hundred and fifty thousand dollars to
multiply it into one hundred and ninety
four million dollars for breast cancer
research
2002 was our most successful year ever
we netted four breast cancer alone that
year alone 71 million dollars after all
expenses and then we went out of
business suddenly and traumatically why
well the short story is our sponsor
split on us they wanted to distance
themselves from us because we were being
crucified in the media for investing
forty percent of the gross in
recruitment and customer service and the
magic of the experience and there is no
accounting terminology to describe that
kind of investment in growth and in the
future other than this demonic label of
overhead so on one day all 350 of our
great employees lost their jobs because
they were labeled overhead
our sponsor went and tried the events on
their own the overhead went up net
income for breast cancer research went
down by eighty four percent or sixty
million dollars in one year this is what
happens when we confuse morality with
frugality we've all been taught that the
big sale with five percent overhead is
morally superior to the professional
fundraising enterprise with 40 percent
overhead but we're missing the most
important piece of information which is
what is the actual size of these pies
who cares if the bake sale only has 5%
overhead if it's tiny what if the bake
sale only netted $71 for charity because
it made no investment in its scale on
the professional fundraising
enterprising that its 71 million dollars
because it did
now which pie would we prefer and which
pie do we think people who are hungry
would prefer here's how all of this
impacts the big picture I said the
charitable giving is 2% of GDP in the
United States that's about 300 billion
dollars a year but only about 20% of
that or sixty billion dollars goes to
Health and Human Services causes the
rest goes to religion and higher
education and hospitals and that sixty
billion dollars is not nearly enough to
tackle these problems but if we could
move charitable giving from 2% of GDP up
just one step just one step two 3% of
GDP by investing in that growth that
would be an extra hundred and fifty
billion dollars a year in contributions
and if that money could go
disproportionately to Health and Human
Services charities because those were
the ones we encouraged to invest in
their growth that would represent a
tripling of contributions to that sector
now are talking scale now we're talking
the potential for real change but it's
never going to happen by forcing these
organizations to lower their horizons to
the demoralizing objective of keeping
their overhead low our generation does
not want its epitaph to read we kept
charity overhead low
we wanted to read that we changed the
world and that part of the way we did
that was by changing the way we think
about these things so the next time
you're looking at a charity don't ask
about the rate of their overhead ask
about the scale of their dreams their
Apple Google Amazon scale dreams how
they measure their progress toward those
dreams and what resources they need to
make them come true regardless of what
the overhead is who cares what the
overhead is if these problems are
actually getting solved if we can have
that kind of generosity a generosity of
thought then the nonprofit sector can
play a massive role in changing the
world for all those citizens most
desperately in need of it to change and
if that can be our generations enduring
legacy that we took responsibility for
the thinking that had been handed down
to us that we revisited it we revised it
and we reinvented the whole way humanity
thinks about changing things forever
for everyone well I thought I would let
the kids sum up what that would be that
would be a real social innovation thank
you very much thank you